And Michael Kilkelly joining us.
Get set.
Karen,
we have 10 minutes with you this morning. That includes time for questions.
Pass it over to you now.
Thank you. Mauri ora koutou.
We're both members of the National Employment Law Committee of the New Zealand Law
Society, Te Kāhui Ture o Aotearoa.
I'm a barrister in Wellington. I've got over 30 years experience in employment
law, which covers two Holidays Acts and two decades in large
law firms. And Michael is an associate with Meredith Connell in Auckland, and
prior to that he was a judge's clerk in the Employment Court in Auckland.
The approach taken by the New Zealand Law Society when commenting on proposed
legislation is a neutral one in terms of policy.
So we're seeking to provide you with feedback on the workability
of the legislation, identifying potential issues in drafting.
And as lawyers, our natural
review mechanism is to think about how we might explain it to our clients.
Mm-hmm.
Our written submission makes a number of comments that are directed to the
predictability and certainty of the proposed legislation, but we'll focus
only on three of those points today, and then leave a few minutes
for questions from you.
So I'll start with the standard hours point that we make in our submission.
The bill is premised on standard hours being specified in
an employment agreement roster or notional roster, and that's the
baseline or foundation for annual leave, public holidays, bereavement
leave, sick leave, domestic violence leave, et cetera.
So it's really important as a concept in this draft
legislation.
So just to start with a practical issue.
At the moment, standard hours isn't required in
employment agreements. The Employment Relations Act brings in more
flexibility than that, and it refers to a requirement to
include an indication of the arrangements relating to the times the employee is
to work. So you see some quite flexible and fluid clauses at the
moment in employment agreements.
So there's going to be some transition needed if we go with the standard hours
notion from what currently is quite flexible and where
many employment agreements won't have standard or set hours
specified, and it's not quite clear how that transition's going to be
addressed.
This leads to the second issue about standard hours, which is the bill requires
that, but doesn't provide a fallback
mechanism if the hours aren't specified in any of those
ways. So where the employer and employee simply don't agree and they stick with
their current employment agreement, what happens then?
The third issue is whether the standard hours truly reflect what the employee
works. And I listened earlier this morning to some of the industry submissions,
which have explained the implication of that for how
the time off part of leave is calculated.
For the Law Society, our concern is twofold.
First is that the standard hours might not reflect the current reality, but
second, the, shall we say, less honorable employers might deliberately
set low standard hours knowing that the employees will
happily voluntarily work additional hours-
Mm-hmm
... in order to boost their pay to that point.
But that means they don't have annual leave and the other actual time off
entitlements that accrue at the rate that they're actually working.
The second point I'm going to touch on is what we colloquially know as
time and a half, for payment on public holidays.
If I can be frank, the clause relating to that,
124, it's quite long. It has cross-references
in itself,
and references between some clauses that are quite difficult to follow.
It's one of those
clauses that you read and you wonder how you might actually explain that to anybody
in terms of how it's meant to work. So it is complicated.
The second point about it is that there are two
mechanisms for the time and a half.
So there's one for time,
and that's what the employer's required to pay the employee for each hour
worked. And then the half has a different calculation,
and that's greater of 50% of the employee's ordinary hourly
rate and any identifiable amount.
So you're doing one calculation for the time and then another one for the half.
And I'm by no means a payroll expert, but I think that's going to
complicate things as people try to put this in
practice.So that,
yeah, those calculation parts might not be the same, which risks the
calculations being very complex to do.
So I'll hand over to Michael now to talk about our final point,
which is the remediation issue.
Thank you, Karen, and good morning, everyone.
So I'm just going to speak to you briefly about the proposed
remediation process for outstanding liabilities under the Holidays Act,
and those provisions are at Clause 156 in Schedule 3 of the bill.
It's proposed that that process will have retrospective effect and could be used to
remediate underpayments and payment failures, which, for whatever
reason, have occurred up to four years prior to the bill receiving the Royal
Assent.
We're concerned that the material relating to the bill does not discuss whether the
retrospective provisions are appropriate.
There does not seem to be any consideration of whether
retrospectivity can adversely impact either employers or
employees. For example, by reducing or extinguishing some
employees' statutory entitlements.
Second, whether the extent of the retrospectivity is appropriate or if it
requires adjustment,
and third, whether this process could upset
or lead to relitigation of settled matters.
We also have concerns as to whether it is appropriate to prescribe
the substantive content
of those retrospective provisions through regulations
rather than through primary legislation, because regulations would not be
subject to the same level of public and parliamentary
scrutiny.
Those concerns are heightened as the bill does not require the minister to
undertake public consultation on the draft
regulations in circumstances where statutory entitlements are
impacted.
Finally, we have concerns about regulations that would specify a
minimum amount payable, a term that is
in that undefined category that I just spoke about, will be defined through the
regulations, because the regulations would not be subject to the same
level of parliamentary and public scrutiny.
This would mean an employer would not be required to make a remediation payment to
an employee whose entitlement is below this threshold.
It raises fairness concerns as the threshold could bar an
employee from receiving a payment they are otherwise entitled to receive,
no matter how small the amount. Those concerns are heightened
because we do not know at what level that threshold will be set or how it will be
calculated.
And a similar concern arises around the concept of reasonable compensation,
given that also appears to contemplate something less than their existing
statutory entitlements.
We advise you to
seek advice on those matters and to consider whether amendments are
necessary to address those concerns.
I'll hand over for questions if there's any time.
Thank you very much. We do have a short amount of time,
but we do have one question. I was going to say, it doesn't appear we have any.
We have a question from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you very much for your
submission.
It kind of backs up, in many respects, what some of the
industry bodies have been saying, as you said.
Just one thing I want to get there, you talked about if there
is not so savory employers as such and what
they might do in this situation. To put it in simple terms, would
that be... And I'm trying to get my head around this too.
Does that mean that they could be incentivizing
part-time and casualization workers in this particular case
because it could mean that they're paying out less in the annual leave?
To answer that vaguely, yes, possibly.
But also you could have full-time employees
who
are put on, say, 35 or 30 hours a week.
It may be that you're thinking of that as part-time, which is probably right, but
work greater hours than that. So they might, say,
have the standard hours of 30 or 35 in their agreement, but
work much more than that and on a regular basis.
And
I think there is a possibility of
some, and I'm hesitating to use this word, but some abuse of the
system,
particularly by unscrupulous employers who are trying to limit how
much time off people actually have, particularly if they have to bring in
replacement employees at a higher cost.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you for that. And a question from Lawrence Yunane.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a very quick question regarding the
standard hours as well. Do you have any data or
what is your understanding of the current average
hours that employees actually work a week?
And potentially, is it greater than the standard hours that
we're seeing now? The reason I ask this question is, we
hear anecdotally, but I want to check if there's any data to say that people are
working longer and longer hours that are
unseen or unaccounted for in their contract.
That's not data that the Law Society would hold.
So the answer to your question is no, we don't have that data.
It might be held by the
Victoria University Employment Relations Centre.
They do an annual analysis of collective agreements and what provisions are in
those. So the data may be somewhere, but it's not held by us, I'm afraid.
Thank you. We might look into that. Thank you so much.
All right. Thank you very much. We appreciate your participation in the
process and your very constructive and helpful submission.
So thank you again.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to of a similar theme, Simpson Grierson.
We have Rachel Judge and Mike Mercer joining us.
Rachel and Mike, we have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that
includes time for questions.
Thank you. Tena koutou katoa. I am Rachel Judge, a
partner at Simpson Grierson, and I'm presenting with my colleague,
Mike Mercer, Senior Associate. We have both been
heavily involved in advising on the current Holidays Act and
assisting clients through their remediation processes.
And we thank you for the opportunity to present our oral submission today on
behalf of Simpson Grierson. This submission has been
informed by feedback from a number of our clients and
also, in line with what Karen's just spoken to, our own
observations as lawyers as to where complexities may
arise based on the wording of the current bill.
At the outset, I do want to note that Simpson Grierson
supports the core objectives of the bill.
We have been actively advocating for many of these
changes for a number of years. In particular, the move to an
hours-based accrual model and the simplification of
leave payment calculations. That said, there are
some aspects of the bill that are likely to pose some compliance
issues for employers, and particularly those with
complex workforces. So we do consider that there
is room for the Bill to potentially include some options to
address some of those issues. And we wish to comment on three
key issues from our written submissions where we have made
recommendations. Those are the notional roster,
the mandatory standard hours versus additional
hours leave compensation payment approach, which we'll refer to
as LCP, and the issue of strike action during the
transitional period.
So just turning to the notional roster framework to
start with. This applies to determine leave
entitlements where an employee's standard hours or days
of work cannot be readily identified.
And while the policy intent is understood, we submit that
the framework as drafted may not be workable in
practice for many employers. Clause nine, for
example, requires that a notional roster is agreed
in writing and kept up to date. In workplaces where
hours are variable or change frequently, that will be
difficult, if not impossible, to apply.
The combination of a requirement for agreement and then
continual updating risks continuous negotiation,
creating significant administrative burden and also
employee relations issues flowing from all of that.
For large employers, and particularly those with unionized workforces,
this is unlikely to be practicable.
There is also a level of uncertainty in the role a notional
roster is intended to play. Although it's described as
notional, the provisions do require it to
reflect actual working patterns to a certain extent and to be
revised as those patterns change.
So this risks blurring the distinction between a genuine
notional construct and an operational roster,
and in our view, risks undermining the purpose of introducing
a simplified mechanism in the first place.
We recognize that there is provision at clauses 10 and 11
for a labor inspector to determine a notional roster where
agreement cannot be reached, but we consider that
reliance on labor inspector determinations as the sole fallback
is likely to result in increased disputes,
delay, and litigation. So on this point, we
submit that the framework would be materially improved by
introducing an express alternative mechanism
where clause nine could be amended to provide that where it is
not reasonably practicable for an employer and employee to
agree a notional roster. That agreement is not
required as a precondition to determining those standard hours for
leave purposes. And in line with that, that clause
10 is amended to allow an employer, without labor
inspector intervention, to determine a notional
roster by applying some form of agreed averaging
method. And we're hearing from our clients that if some form of
rolling average were applied, such as the 13-week average,
that that's something that could be workable for them going forward.
Mm-hmm.
I'll now hand over to Mike Mercer to discuss the
further two points we wanted to raise.
Thank you, Rachel, and kia ora koutou katoa.
Further, the two points I want to speak to, the first relates to the leave
compensation approach, and like our learned friends from the New Zealand Law
Society, we address the mechanism for additional hours being
paid with via the leave compensation payment.
While we understand this is intended to provide certainty and to avoid the
accumulation of large leave liabilities, there are circumstances
where hours of work will fluctuate and it could create
some outcomes for an employer that are not consistent with the Bill and operational
difficulties. In particular, the structure of the leave
compensation payment will create incentive for employees to
favor being paid in a cash loading rather than accruing leave
and resist agreement to standard hours.
What we're hearing from clients who are really concerned about their ability to
agree with standard hours with their employees is that given the
attractiveness of leave compensation payment, you could end up
in a situation that is different to what was being discussed
previously, with actually employees, all time including, who
would prefer to end up on low standard hours with large additional
hours that would provide the disincentive to them taking sick
leave when needed and significantly receive their reduced pay when they do
so.The bill doesn't currently allow for alternative approaches
that may produce the same or better outcome for employees.
In practice, we are hearing from clients who have a strong preference to accrue
leave on all hours worked, including additional hours,
while others may prefer the pay-as-you-go model of the
compensation payment.
Either approach would be broadly neutral in effect for employees.
They either get leave paid at the time or the ability to take it
later. In our view, there is scope to deliver on the intent of the
bill while allowing greater flexibility in how leave entitlements are
delivered without jeopardizing employee protections or entitlements.
We therefore recommend that clauses 129 and
132 of the bill be amended to allow employers, as
an alternative to paying leave compensation on additional hours,
to accrue leave on all hours worked in addition,
including those additional hours at their election.
The second point we wish to raise relates to strike action during the
transitional period. It is inevitable that there will be areas of
disagreement during the transition process, given the new leave framework
will require significant changes to existing employment agreements,
payroll systems, and operational practices.
We are concerned that without clear limits, disputes arising solely from
the application of the transitional provisions may become the subject of
strike action or lockouts.
There is precedent that unions and employees cannot participate in
unlawful industrial action, even when it otherwise relates to
bargaining, if the issue in dispute arises from a legislatively
defined process.
By way of example,
the Fair Pay Agreements Act in 2022, which has
since been repealed, included express restrictions on industrial
action in relation to fair pay bargaining.
We therefore recommend that the bill be amended to provide that disputes arising
solely from the application or operation of the transitional provisions cannot
be subject to industrial action during the transitional
period. This could be achieved by either adopting a similar
approach to that in the former Fair Pay Agreement Act, and in
this context, disagreements about the conversion, reconciliation, or technical
application of the transition rules should be treated as procedural
matters and resolved through interpretation, guidance, or dispute resolution
mechanisms by the employment institutions rather than
industrial action. Thank you, Madam Chair and members of the Select Committee.
We are prepared to take any questions at this time.
We have one minute, and it doesn't appear that we do.
And can I just say, it is not a reflection of the lack of
interest. I have to make that very clear.
Very good.
You always put forward an incredibly-
Very good
... comprehensive and helpful submission.
Yeah.
And I thank you for that, and I know that our officials would-
Excellent. Thank you
... thank you for that, too.
Thank you.
Very good. Thank you.
So we'll move on now to our next submitter.
Thank you.
Thank you. We have Madfly Limited Trading.
We have Sheryn Waltu.
Hopefully, I'm pronouncing your surname correctly.
That's all right.
Enterprise and Staffing Innovations New Zealand, if that makes more sense
to you.
Apologies. Having a few technical issues there. I hope you can hear me.
That's okay. Easy. You got-
Right. So apologies.
EasyNZ, sorry. Let's just get that right. I happen to see in your logo.
Sorry. It is actually, it's a trading name of Madfly Limited.
So, thank you, Madam Chairman and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear here today and to speak on, uh, to EasyNZ's
written submission on the Employment Leave Bill.
My name is Sheryn Waltu, and I'm the managing director appearing on behalf of
Enterprise and Staffing Innovations NZ, otherwise known as EasyNZ.
By way of background, EasyNZ provides practical employment relations and
HR support to businesses across New Zealand.
A big part of our work is helping clients with the operational employment issues
that come up every day in real workplaces.
Things like leave, payroll, payroll interpretation, rostering process, and
documentation. These are matters that can look quite straightforward on paper, but
if they're handled incorrectly, they can very quickly turn into disputes.
A large proportion of our clients are small to medium-sized businesses.
For those businesses, getting employment processes wrong is not just frustrating,
it's expensive, distracting, and disruptive.
Most do not have in-house legal teams or large HR functions,
if at all. They're trying to do the right thing, but they need the law to be clear,
and they need it to be workable. When disputes do arise,
even a claim with little or no merit can still cost up
to $10,000 to defend in cost alone before you
factor in management time, stress, and disruption to the business.
So from our perspective, clarity in employment legislation really matters.
If the law is too technical, too uncertain, or too hard to apply in day-to-day
operations, the consequences are very real.
With that in mind, our overall position on this is that we support
the direction of reform, but we say the bill still needs refinement.
We support the objective behind the bill.
The current leave framework is too complicated.
It's been difficult for employers to understand and difficult for payroll systems
to properly apply, and it's led to too many errors and too much
uncertainty, so reform is needed.
We support the intention of creating a simpler and clearer leave system, but
our key message today is that simplification should not come at the cost of
fairness, operational workability, or new compliance risks.
In our view, the bill makes some very positive changes, but there are still several
areas where it needs tightening so it does not simply replace one set of problems
with another.
So there are parts of the bill that we clearly support.
We support pro-rated sick leave accruing from the first day of employment.
That's easier to understand, and it better reflects service over time.
We support annual leave accruing from day one.
That's much easier to explain than the current distinction between accrued leave
and annual leave becoming available only after 12 months.
And we support clearer rules around public holidays and otherwise working days.
Greater clarity in that area should reduce uncertainty and reduce the risk of
underpayment issues.So this is not a submission opposing
reform, quite the opposite. We support reform.
We just want to make sure the reform is genuinely workable in practice.
Our biggest concern is the 12.5% leave compensation payment for
hours above minimum contracted hours.
Mm.
This is probably our most significant concern.
We're concerned about the proposal to require a leave compensation payment of at
least 12.5% for additional hours and casual hours.
That may appear simple at a high level, but in practice, it creates real problems
for businesses where workers have genuine ongoing employment and regular
patterns of work, but may work more than their guaranteed minimum hours.
This is a very common arrangement, especially in small to medium businesses.
In many cases, businesses will guarantee, for example, 30 hours a week,
but regularly offer more. The reason for that is practical.
In sectors such as agriculture and construction, the amount of work available
is often heavily dependent on weather conditions and changing operational
demands. Businesses are trying to provide employees with a reliable
minimum, while still retaining the flexibility to offer more hours when
conditions allow. So a person may be contracted for 30 hours, but
often work 40 when the weather is favorable and work can proceed, and in things
like construction, that could actually be even more, so you might work more hours
in the summer than you do in the winter.
That
does not make them casual in the ordinary sense.
Our concern is that if every hour above guaranteed minimum automatically attracts a
12.5% leave payment, that creates a number of problems.
So it creates more payroll complexity, not less.
It increases labor cost immediately.
It may reduce the employee's ability to build up meaningful paid leave over time,
and it may encourage a system where leave is effectively cashed out as work
happens, instead of being preserved as time away from work.
Mm.
From our perspective, that's not just a payroll issue, it's also a wellbeing
issue.
Mm.
So our recommendation is that the bill should draw a clearer distinction between
genuine casual work and ordinary additional hours worked in
ongoing employment.
Where there is a real ongoing employment, there should be a pathway for leave to
accrue rather than requiring automatic pay-as-you-go treatment.
So the bill also needs to be clearer and more practical, there needs to be more
practical treatment of casual employment.
Closely linked to the 12.5% leave compensation payment is the question of
casual work.
One of the real issues for employers is knowing when a worker who starts out as a
casual has in reality become regular.
Mm.
That matters because it affects payroll treatment, leave treatment,
legal risks, and fairness. If the bill is going to rely on a separate model
for casual employees, then it needs to be much clearer about when
someone is genuinely casual and when they're no longer casual.
Mm.
Otherwise, we're just creating a new uncertainty in place of an old one.
So our recommendation is that the bill include either a clearer statutory test
or a review point, so that where work becomes regular and predictable, the employee
moves into the ordinary accrual work frame or framework,
sorry.
The bill should also avoid creating unfairness between casual and permanent
workers. We're also concerned about parity on this one.
If a casual worker receives 12.5% upfront, but a permanent worker
accrues leave that only becomes valuable when it's actually taken, then there's a
real possibility of inequitable outcomes between different categories
of workers.
We're not suggesting casual workers should be disadvantaged. That's not our point.
Our point is that simplification should still produce fair outcomes
across the workforce. The committee should test carefully whether the
structure of the bill creates unintended imbalance between workers who may be
doing similar work, but under different employment arrangements.
So next we have KiwiSaver and commission need to be expressly clarified.
We also think the bill should be clearer on some points around the remuneration
issues. The first is KiwiSaver. The treatment of KiwiSaver in relation to
leave compensation payments should be set out clearly in the legislation.
Mm.
If it's not, employers and payroll providers will take different approaches, and
that inconsistency will create exactly the kind of confusion this reform is trying
to fix.
The second is commission and non-discretionary incentive payments.
A simpler model, sorry, simpler leave model should not result in regular commission
income being left out of leave calculations where that income is a normal
part of the employee's earnings. If that happens,
employees in commission-based or incentive-based roles may end up worse off
when taking leave, and that creates a real disincentive to taking leave at all.
That would be an unfair outcome and would undermine the broader purpose of leave
entitlements. So we say the bill should expressly preserve the inclusion of
regular non-discretionary payment and similar payments, or provide a
mechanism that properly captures them.
The variable hour work is still not fully resolved, especially around
day-based leave and notional rosters.
Our final point is that the bill does not yet fully resolve the practical issues
that arise for workers with variable hours and variable days.
Mm.
We remain concerned about day-based leave, particularly bereavement leave
and family violence leave.
Mm.
Where people do not work the same pattern each week, there can be uncertainty about
what counts as a day, how part days should be treated, and how leave should apply
across changing rosters.
We're also concerned about notional
rosters. At the moment, the bill does not seem to give enough practical certainty
about when a notional roster is required, what information is needed to create
one, and when it should be reviewed.
Without that clarity, there's a real risk of more inconsistency,
more confusion, and ultimately more disputes.
At the very least, we think that the legislation or supporting regulations
should include clearer guidance and practical worked examples
before the bill comes into force.
So in closing, our message is a straightforward one.
We support the goal of this bill. We support day one accrual for
sick leave and annual leave, and we support clearer public holiday rules.
But we ask the committee to refine the bill so it does not simplify shift
complexity from one part of the system to another.
Sorry, does not simply shift complexity. Sorry.
In particular, we ask the committee to look carefully at the 12.5% leave
compensation rule, the treatment of casual work,
fairness between casual and permanent workers, KiwiSaver treatment,
commissioner and incentive payments, and the practical operation of day-based
leave and notional rosters. If these areas are improved, we think the bill
will be stronger, fairer, and much more workable in the real world.
Thank you for your time, and I'm happy to answer questions if you've got time.
Thank you very much, Sherylyn. We do believe-- I think
we've run out of time with you, we have, unfortunately.
But thank you so much for being part of this process, and I've got to say, a really
good submission, really helpful.
And I assume-
Thank you
... and assure you, sorry, that the
officials will be pleased too.
Oh, thank you very much.
Move on now to Essential HR. Mike Johnson,
who I believe is online.
Mike, there we are. Wonderful. Oh.
I came, and I went.
Yes.
That was a quick submission. There we go, Mike.
Ten minutes for you, includes time for questions, and we'll hand it over to you
now.
Tena koutou. Good morning. I'm Mike Johnson from Essential
HR,
and I want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to speak to you all.
Madam Chairman, and members of the committee, I'd like to start by saying how
impressed I am with the draft legislation.
It had a horrible starting place, being the Holidays Act, and so
many things to address, and it does,
from my point of view, I really sense some positive development moving ahead
from the Holidays Act,
and a very clear attempt to address a wide range of issues, things like casual
staff and the pro-rata-ing of sick leave from day one, dealing
with on-call and stuff like that. It's, yeah, raise my hat
to you all, and especially as you now try and process
everything that's coming at you in this consultation.
Now, I speak on behalf of SMEs.
I have some four to five hundred whom I provide HR advice to,
and I've been pleased that I can already go back to them and
confirm for many of them that their concerns will be addressed in the new
legislation, and there'll always be some, of course, that are not.
There is one, though, in particular, and it's the first and significant issue
that I referred to in my written submission,
that I want to address today, and I strongly suggest
you consider the particular recommendation that I'm going to make.
And the reality is that this is all about
enabling small businesses to comply with the legislation.
So I want you to start by picturing an SME.
It may be a small retail outlet, a cafe, a restaurant, roofing
contractor. There are any number of them whose workload
is dependent on the weather or on a daily varying
level of customer demand. We all know them, and these
businesses can thrive, but that's especially where staff are
working as a team. They dig deep sometimes.
They
leave early where that benefits the business.
They'll work a Saturday to help make up time.
And for these and many others, compliance with the Holidays Act was just a
nightmare.
There was no way a business owner could understand what was needed to comply,
so they relied on their payroll provider to do things
right. But we all know that at some stage, all payroll
systems were non-compliant with the Holidays Act.
And yet it was the SME who
bore the brunt and the cost of a labor inspector's
audit and its resulting penalties,
and it just didn't seem right.
For example, how many payroll systems that you know, do you think would cope
easily with a roster that has somebody working,
Wednesday, seven hours, Thursday, 10, Friday, 10,
Saturday, 14 and a half, Sunday, two, with
sleepovers in between each of them, then three days rest, and then going through
the whole thing again. It was a roster that effectively
is an eight-day revolving roster, but payroll systems just
couldn't cope with it.
It was almost not possible to comply
with the legislation.
We need something similar, something
simple rather, not similar, something simple to manage
what have become some of the most complex of rosters.
And while this bill has gone so far, it can easily go a step
further in removing complexity.
It's a real challenge when it comes to drafting
legislation, I know.
And I've just pulled out Section 123 of the bill, Section
2, Subsection 2, where "The employee's leave payment must not be
not less than the rate of leave payment for each relevant hour,
that the employee takes as a period of leave, or that he does not work on a
public holiday that would otherwise be a working day," et cetera.
Yet for most business owners, if you present them
with that, it's not that
it's wrong. It's not. It's correct.
But it's just that it leaves them saying, "Eh?"
The business owners are never going to get their heads around it.
For the SMEs that I had you picturing before, there's no
simple standard hours,
and the many additional hours may or may not be linked to an
availability clause,
because for many of them, it's actually just part of their commitment to their
jobs.
So we need a simpler way to collate dollars for leave payments
broadly,
and for ease of understanding and to avoid having to
rely on the payroll provider for compliance.
So please, can we have just a few very simple
rules built into this legislation?
The first one, for every dollar that you earn-You put
aside, or that somebody earns, you put aside another 12 and a half
cents for leave, eight and a half probably for annual leave, four for
sick leave.
For every hour worked, you accrue the 0.0769
hours plus 0.0385 hours.
For every uncertain otherwise working day, we
use the 13
weeks. It is great. You've got some very simple stuff already built into the
draft legislation. Take it that step further, that all
earnings get treated the same way.
You don't separate out standard hours from other hours.
That everything that relates to hours worked or protection of
employment or employment status, leave that with the Employment Relations Act.
We don't need to muddy the waters within the Employment
Leave Act.
And leave it so that payroll providers are doing
just that. They're providing a payroll service.
I really urge you to press on. Don't
allow the tightness of the timeframe to
stop you from making that extra change and making it that little
bit more simple that employers will be able to comply.
Are there any questions?
Thank you, Mike. I don't appear to have any questions.
Oh, we have one from Pam Shea. Very quickly, Pam.
Just very quickly, Mike, thank you so much.
When you started your submission, Mike, you sounded like you're fully supportive of
this legislation. And then, of course, you want this legislation to go a bit
further. Then when I read your first line in your submission, it says that you're
neither supporting nor opposing this bill. So why so undecided?
Okay. Thank you for pointing that out.
I tend to start most of my submissions in that sort of
way. On the whole, yes, I'm very supportive of what you're changing.
I'd far rather see this go through than it not go through.
Mm-hmm.
I would love to see, though, that one step more, make it even
simpler-
Thank-
... make it even easier for small business owners to comply.
Can I just say, Mike, thank you. Just to acknowledge the things that we've heard
again and again today that are workable and then the things that you think can be
improved and how constructive you've been with that.
Yeah.
So it's really helpful for our officials, and moving forward as well.
So thanks for your time. Thanks for your participation.
And we'll now move on to our next submitter.
Thanks, Pam.
Thank you, Mike.
Good luck.
Thank you. We now have Paul Mackay from Business New
Zealand
joining us on Zoom.
Paul,
can I just check that you're online? Here we are. Wonderful.
Yeah. Yeah, yes.
Welcome, Paul. We have 10 minutes with you for Business New Zealand, and that
includes time for questions. And sorry, we hadn't acknowledged
you. We have you, John, as well.
John, are you with Business New Zealand or EMA?
I'm with the EMA, but we're one of the core members of Business New Zealand, and so
I'm just listening in on Paul's submission.
Okay, no worries.
And then I'll then go on the back, and Paul will do likewise. He'll join us.
So we're together.
Okay.
We're together, yes.
Absolutely.
Hence your submissions are one after the other. Right.
Yes.
So Paul, over to you. You've got 10 minutes, and that includes time for questions.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, and I welcome this opportunity to talk to
the submission. I'm Paul Mackay. I'm the Manager of Employment Relations
Policy at Business New Zealand. And I have a history with the Holidays Act going
back to 2003, so every review since.
We're very pleased to see this bill.
It contains essentially the elements that we have always asked for,
which is a simplified approach, an hours-based accrual approach.
And so therefore, our submission is designed in support
of the bill, but to highlight two or three things which we think, like a
number of the previous submitters have said, would be
different from a simplification.
And also to point out some of the issues that might arise if we can't get
that kind of simplification. Some of the issues have already been covered, so I
won't deal with them in detail,
but I will come back to them, but I'd like to spend a little bit of time first on
the remediation process.
As it's written in the bill, there is a process in the bill that doesn't have the
criteria that would allow
a decision to be made, and the
process doesn't come into effect u-under the
bill until the rest of the bill comes into effect, in two years' time,
effectively. Whereas the regulations that would give the
ammunition, if you like, for the process,
will be
able to be developed as soon as the bill is passed.
That, to us, seems to be an opportunity missed.
The remediation process, after all, is about the history.
It's about the current act and the pitfalls that have
been found in terms of how hard it is to make
payments. And the history of the last few years has been full
of many thousands of hours, many hundreds of
thousands of dollars of cost in terms of remediating and getting agreement to
processes. What we would rather see, perhaps, is
rather than have a schedule come into effect in two years' time and regulations
that can be developed at any time from the date of assent,
is to put it all together and say, "Why don't we have the process and the criteria
able to be developed together, and as soon as they're available, they can be used?"
That would be the first element of our suggestion.
But the second is-As it stands in the bill, the
process effectively allows the employer to choose to use the
process, and without the permission of the employees who would be affected by
it.
That has some potential ramifications, particularly in relation to
the Wages Protection Act, because it seems to us
that an employee whose pay has not been correctly determined
under the current act is, as it is now, currently entitled
to have that put right. And yet the remediation process, as we
heard from an earlier submitter, may contain elements
that have an averaging or a near enough is good enough
answer to it, which may in fact leave that employee short of what they would
otherwise get if they were properly remediated under the current act.
And there's no mention of the Wages Protection Act
in relation to this, so there's a potential
point to be checked, and it's up to officials to have
a look at that. But we would rather see a process that was developed
together in its entirety so that proper consultation could be
undertaken over the development of that process and through the regulatory process.
And also that the use of it is one that has
the employees engaged with it as well, so that they can see that what they're being
offered is fair and the whole process comes together as one
rather than being in two parts. So that's remediation as far as we're concerned.
We think that would benefit. We're also got the issue
of, as a number of submitters have made on the
leave compensation payment. But first in relation to rosters.
As it stands, the bill effectively has a roster that can contain
both standard hours and agreed additional hours.
With the issues that have been raised around the cost of additional
hours and the leave compensation attached to them, we think there's sense,
both from a payroll point of view and also a cost and common sense point of view,
that a roster is a roster. So anything in a roster would
be standard hours, and anything outside a roster would be additional
hours.
That,
I think, goes a long way to addressing some of the concerns that the Law
Society and others raised, where the cost of additional hours inside a roster,
especially where the rosters are variable, can have quite unforeseen
circumstantial consequences for businesses, certainly additional costs, and
particularly in relation to small businesses, as we heard with the previous
submitter. The variability of costs is one of the things that they confront every
day. Simplifying it so that any given roster is
known to have a particular cost attached to it would be of
a benefit.
There are a number of other points in our submission
which are
written down, so they can be taken as read.
I think they're relatively self-explanatory.
So I'd rather leave as much time as possible for questions, if that's okay with
you.
That is wonderful, Paul, and appreciated by our committee.
We've got a question first from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you, and thank you, Paul. Lovely to see you.
And can I also acknowledge the work that you've done in the Holidays Act over the
years, and it's been very much appreciated across governments,
and very much put into use, I can see in this
bill and how it's been written. But I want to go back to that question, and you
might have heard my question before when I asked the Law Society.
You talk about rosters and using the rosters.
One of the reasons why we voted against this bill at the first reading is that we
feel that there are people, as it's written at the moment, who would be
missing out on their leave allocations.
In the way that this bill's written at the moment, would the
way that you have written this suggest with the
rosters and work that's sitting on roster, would that
solve that issue, do you think?
It would go a long way towards it, and I think it's actually of a benefit to both
employees and employers. First of all, if you add anything
in a roster, be they so-called agreed additional hours and standard
hours, should attract leave accrual, but not
necessarily the extra payment. So there's a benefit to the employee in that
they would accrue leave on all of the hours they worked inside their roster,
and the benefit to the employer is they're not paying extra costs simply because a
portion of that roster is so-called additional hours.
So I think it goes a good way to balancing out that issue.
I'm certainly not a payroll expert.
I don't claim that it will solve all problems, but we think it would go quite a way
towards it.
No, and I totally get that, but could you explain to
me what... So I'm just trying to think of a scenario
where you would work outside of a roster.
Have you got a scenario where there would be
work outside of the roster?
There's quite often situations, I'll use a manufacturing example because
I've had that kind of experience, where people have a standard roster,
their shift roster, if you like.
Mm-hmm.
But then there are times when, for instance, the mill
is shut down for maintenance, and that roster is still working, but then there's
a whole lot of other extra work to be done for maintenance.
So the people agree that they will add another four or five
hours to their normal rostered shift pattern to
accommodate that extra work. And that would become their pattern for that period of
time, and then they would normally revert back to their normal operational roster.
So
the way that the bill is cast is that all of those additional hours would attract
more money, but they wouldn't attract any more leave.
Mm-hmm.
So there's a double
whammy for both employee and employer in having just
the payment for the extra hours and no leave for the
employee.
It's quite common to have rosters shift around in terms of their
variability. Most rosters, I have to say, most rosters are pretty standard.
You've got your standard 8-hour roster or your standard 12-hour roster.
But overall, there can be many, many occasions when they vary for
very good reason, but they're done in a structured way and not
the kind of, can you work overtime tomorrow night kind of way, but in the kind of,
we've got a big order coming in, we want to put a whole lot of extra
shift in or extra hours on shifts for the next period while we get this big
order out. That's not an uncommon situation.
And we have a question now from Parmjeet Parmar.
Thank you so much, Paul, for your submission.
So this is about your support in principle for
LCP.
We have had some submitters this morning who think that it is not a
good idea because it actually undermines the core
purpose of paid leave, so that paid leave time is time that
people should be spending with their family doing other things.
So what would you say to those who think that LCP is
not a good idea?
I've lost you there.
You'll have to say it again, Parmjeet.
Oh, sorry.
Are you there, Paul?
He's frozen.
Frozen, I think.
Mm.
Right. John, did you want to be able to answer that question?
To be honest, Paul's probably got more technical expertise on that.
But I'm happy to start with a bit of talk about the EMA's submission, and
Paul, as you were saying-
Oh, Paul. No, that's all right
I don't know where that went.
Paul, we do have one more question after this.
If you could answer that quickly, and we'll move on to the next question.
That'd be great.
Thank you, Paul.
Sorry, I missed that piece. For some reason I dropped out and came back again.
Yeah. No, we know.
Okay. So, because you support LCP in
principle, and we have had-
Yes, we do. Yes
... some submitters, those who oppose LCP, they say that it
actually undermines the whole purpose of paid leave, because paid leave is about
people having their own time, time with their family.
So what would you say to those-
The LCP-
Yeah
... LCP is useful in the sense that it deals with the costs
of,
particularly in the casual work side of things, but having it attached
to
additional hours inside what you might call standard hours or rosters
creates a cost. It is also problematic when it comes to sick leave because
additional hours worked are not normally part
of something a person would get sick leave for.
So we have some concerns, and we've detailed that in our submission in
relation to the quantum of the leave compensation payment, but the principle of it
we are very supportive of.
We have a question from Vanessa Weenink.
Thank you very much, Paul. In one of the earlier submissions, there was a
statement around the fact that Business New Zealand,
CTU, and MB had been working on this for a while,
and sort of an implication that what has come out of this process
wasn't quite what was expected. How do you react to that?
Mm.
I think things have moved from time-- We had the review in
2018, which was a consensus-based document with
recommendations. That resulted in a shadow or an
exposure draft, which we had significant issues with it because it
made things much more complicated.
The move to an hours-based accrual approach is the single
biggest factor that we think which is going to make an improvement in everything.
And so we've seen an evolution of this.
So,
it wasn't what we expected in the first place because that's not what we agreed in
2018, but we've evolved to a point where we're particularly comfortable with the
overall direction of this.
Marvelous. Thank you.
Great. All right. We'll move on now to you again,
as the EMA, Employers and Manufacturers Association.
So Paul, we have you and
I believe John as Allan is unable to
join us.
So we'll let John start with that.
Okay, wonderful.
Thank you. So as an introduction, I'm John Fraser McKenzie.
I'm the chief executive of the EMA, and I would like to add, in
my former career, I worked as both the CFO, CEO, and
business owner of businesses with 2,000 employees, 1,000 employees,
and as the owner of a business with five employees.
So I have been a victim of the current legislation in
a number of different guises before.
So the EMA, so we're the largest business association in New Zealand.
We believe we represent about 20% of the country's
workforce across both very large, significant businesses from
Foodstuffs and Fonterra, down to very small businesses.
We're a national association. We're focused on the
commercial heartland of New Zealand, and we've been around for 140
years. So in terms of the current
discussion, we put our first submission on the current act over eight
years ago, so we've been very involved with it, as has Paul and
Business New Zealand.
So I'd just like to talk to our process of how we've gone about
testing and
getting some input from members. So we've tested the substance of the
bill with more than 600 members across a highly
interactive series of roadshows in both
Tauranga, Hamilton, Whangarei, and Auckland.
And the people who attended those roadshows were payroll and HR
specialists, and they really tore apart the fabric of the
proposals and applied it to their workplaces.
So we had a very interactive process with them, and we fed
that feedback back to MB.
And so at various points are reflected in the draft bill.
So we've had a very thorough interrogation of what's in there.
Excuse me. We also had the opportunity to run it past approximately
2,000 of our members at our regular briefing series, which we run across
16 different venues, and
that's through the upper North Island that took place at the end of last year.
And we've also had some detailed workshops with select
members, which range from complex workplaces, supports,
distribution centers, retail, and healthcare, and they were
also part of some workshops and confidential focus
groups with MB. So we've had an extensive engagement with a
multitude of businesses, and that's what's informed our submission.
We also have internally our own experts in employment law, collective bargaining,
and employment relations and who have pulled apart the legislation.
So collectively, our internal experts have
over 80 years of experience in the field.
And again, that's been informative for our
submission.We all agree that the legislation is a
vast improvement on the current one.
It would be a big step forward for business.
We strongly support the new bill, and we would
like to be given some time to test it and
to prove itself,
and to make necessary amendments as time goes by.
We do need some stability to see how the new legislation plays out,
but we do think it's both simpler for employers and employees,
and so are very supportive.
And as I mentioned before, we do
support the changes both reflected by Business NZ
and in our submission. And as Paul is more of a technical expert than I
am, I think he is on hand to help answer any of your
questions on the EMA submission, with which Paul is very familiar.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Do we have any questions from the committee?
It appears not, and as I've said earlier in the day, not a reflection of a lack of
interest. You've had a very comprehensive couple of submissions that have been
really helpful for us and for our officials.
So, thank you for your involvement, and your contribution.
Paul, acknowledging you, and your involvement over time as well to get it to where
we are.
Very much. Thank you.
Thank you, Paul. Thank you also to the MB team who've been outstanding.
Particularly good. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
Okay, we'll move on now to MYOB. Kevin in the room.
Welcome. And we have Courtney, Anna-Louise, and Abby with us.
Hi.
We have 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions, and it's over to you
now, ma'am.
Thank you. Thank you to the committee members for hearing from us today.
My name is Courtney Sloane, and I'm head of government relations for MYOB across
Australia and New Zealand. I'm joined by my colleagues, Anna-Louise Hoffman, who
is head of corporate affairs for New Zealand, and Abby Dummer, who is
our solutions manager of consulting solutions at MYOB.
And she can answer any technical questions you have about our product today.
MYOB has been a leading provider of payroll and business management software
for local small and midsize businesses for over 30 years.
We see firsthand how various legislative settings translate into
real-world outcomes for our customers and their employees.
Our submission and our comments today reflect our views as a technology provider
and center on the clarity both we and our customers need to adhere to the law.
Across New Zealand, small and midsize businesses rely on software like ours to
interpret and apply the law correctly, and when the rules are complex,
the risk of error increases.
For many years, employers and employees have faced complexity and
uncertainty in how leave entitlements are calculated and applied.
In our view, this bill represents a positive step towards a more transparent,
consistent, and workable system.
In particular, the move to an hours-based accrual model significantly
simplifies calculations, improves clarity for
employees and employers, and reduces the likelihood of
unintentional non-compliance.
It is a practical reform that better aligns with how modern workplaces are working
today. At the same time, the scale of change required to
implement these reforms should not be underestimated.
Delivering compliant payroll systems involves product development,
extensive testing, customer education, and transition
support. This is a multi-phase process that requires careful
sequencing across government, software providers, payroll professionals,
unions, and employees.
While we welcome the proposed transition period, we encourage the committee to
carefully consider how that transition is structured.
Careful staging within the two-year transition period with clear
milestones and an allowance for pilot programs will be critical to
reducing any implementation risk and ensuring all parties are
ready. Our submission outlines several recommendations we believe would
strengthen the bill and support a successful transition for businesses and
workers alike, and we welcome your questions today.
Wonderful. We have a question from Grant McCallum. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you very much.
Earlier, one of the earlier submitters made the comment that the
new legislation was being designed
more to make it easy for payroll companies to deliver
the product, rather than to make it fairer
for the workers. That was a direct-
Good quote
... quote from an earlier submitter. Any comment to that, please?
I think for us, we simply seek clarity, and when
there's clarity in the legislation, employees are more likely to
receive the entitlements that they're entitled to.
Mm-hmm.
And employers are more able to understand their obligations.
Software is an important part of that because employing businesses rely on
software to make sure that they're paying their workers' entitlements correctly.
So
I wouldn't necessarily agree with the assertion that this is being
designed with software in mind.
Mm-hmm.
However, I would say that having clarity of rules makes it
easier for software to help its customers adhere to the
law and get workers what they're entitled to.
Thank you. We have a question from Tiano Tufuga.
Yeah. That transition period,
and you said that it'll take structure and
milestones and stuff like that.
Do you have any specific
ideas around what
kind of barriers you might see in the way in terms of trying to iron it all out?
And will the two years be enough, or is it too short, too long, or whatever?
We believe two years is sufficient,
just. We require 18 months to build the product, and then
a minimum of six months to make sure that our customers are educated and that the
resources are available for them to learn about the
new system and what their obligations are.
In terms of sequencing within that two years, our argument is really
about
Pointing out that if everyone waits until the end of that two-year
period to have all their systems ready and in place,
we risk being misaligned. And an example of that is,
without the necessary guidance from MBIE, software cannot
build the product and code in the rules that the law requires of us.
And if the product's not ready, then the customers and employee
businesses don't know how to use that new software.
So breaking that two-year period up into milestones where
MBIE guidance is provided in, say, the first few months, software is
ready by 18 months, six-month transition period for educating
customers. Did you have anything to add for that, Abby?
Not in particular, but definitely the education piece for employees
and employers would be relatively huge.
Especially things like understanding how to convert their existing leave
balances into the new
rules. And so we would want to be working through a test-and-learn process for
almost all of that two-year period, to work with customers and understand how best
to implement that across our customer base.
Great. I have a question from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you. I want to go to your submission that you talk about
Subpart A and the leave compensation payment,
and about the clarity that you as a payroll provider
would require.
Can you talk me through what the difficulties would be as it's
for you as a provider now, as it's drafted?
What are the difficulties that would be for you
that this LCP would create?
Do you want to try that one, Kate?
Yeah. I think what we need to really consider when we are dealing with these types
of calculations is that when we move to notional rosters,
standard hours, overtime considerations, et cetera, we need to be really
clear in rostering systems and time and attendance systems how employees'
rosters are broken down. Taking into consideration, for example, in a
rostered day, what portion of that day is part of their standard
hours, therefore accruing annual leave, or what portion is an LCP.
So we really need some clarity to be sure that we're building out their
rostering systems in particular, and understanding and interpreting those hours
worked, and whether or not things like an ongoing,
regular roster that is, say, pre-planned and approved by the employees every two
weeks then becomes a notional roster for the purposes of
accruing leave. Or whether a notional roster or standard hours are in
place, but an employee may be rostered for a longer period of time
due to any other reactive factors that a business may have.
So economic factors,
peak holiday seasons for retail, for example, all those types of things.
So when we get to a variable employee base, it's
very important that we're clear on what constitutes standard
hours, notional rosters, and the LCP
hours as well.
So the way that this is drafted at the moment,
is there the possibility that this would create greater
complexity in this part?
I would probably need to look at that in a little more detail, but I think the main
thing for a software provider is understanding that clarity
around what constitutes a notional roster for those
variable workers, how often can that be updated, all of those
types of things, so that we can ensure that when rostering systems are in place, is
it looking at the actual rosters, notional rosters.
So it's really just about being clear on the rules there.
That's helpful. Thank you.
We have a final question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, just
once again, following on from a comment earlier.
The
problems with the current act, there's been a whole lot of issues
and there was a general interpretation challenge for the
payroll companies as a whole and led to a whole lot of
back pay and legal issues and so forth.
Are you confident that this new replacement act is going
to be able to alleviate those concerns?
You'll be able to deliver a product that's accurate?
Do you want to have a-
Yeah. Look, I think certainly the simplicity and
clarity that
we're seeing come through in the current draft bill.
And from talking with payroll specialists like Abby and the rest of the team we
have back at MYOB, it is certainly more workable, and
ultimately that is where we would like to see the bill get to, is
that it is workable in the system. There is that room for judgment and
interpretation is removed because that has, of course, contributed to a lot of
those issues.
And that essentially that it's easily applicable for employers and employees
as well, so they can get those entitlements.
Thank you.
And just further to that, Mr.
McCallum. Apologies. The guidance that we receive from MBIE
early in the process would be critical for getting that clarity of
interpretation.
They didn't quite get it all right themselves last time.
Just wanting to-
It's a very complex piece of legislation, that's for sure.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you so much for your contribution to the process.
Do appreciate you being here in person. It's refreshing.
We're spending a lot of time on screens.
And so, yeah, thank you again for being here, and we'll move on now-
Thank you
... to-
Thanks a lot
... our next speaker, who is online.
Guy Van Raaijvis we have from Rostermate.
Guy, hopefully we have you online.
Hello, hello.
Ah, welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions, and we'll leave it to you to manage your time
accordingly, and it's over to you now.
Great. Thank you.
So, my name is Guy. I'm one of the co-founders
of Rostermate, which is one of New Zealand's leading workforce
management platforms.We work with businesses across the
country in almost every industry, from small family-owned
cafes to larger corporations, helping them
automate employee scheduling, time tracking, and importantly
today, leave management.
So leave compliance for us is not just an abstract policy
problem. It is something we build, test, and work
with every single day.
I'm here today because this bill will ultimately be
implemented into software systems like RosterMate,
and I want to offer my ideas as to how we can go about making sure that this
bill works in practice and not just in the law.
The old system was broken.
It left key terms like reasonable,
undefined, and that forced software vendors and
employers to make judgment calls,
which inevitably led to inconsistency across New Zealand.
So it is encouraging to see that this bill is introducing
clearer and more structured rules, such as the otherwise working
day test.
But I believe that there's an opportunity right now to
go even further and close the gap
between legislation and real-world
implementation.
And so today, I would like to offer two of my ideas.
First, an AI-powered legislative
search tool.
This would allow anyone to describe a real workplace
situation in plain English and be taken
directly to the relevant parts of the bill,
with those sections clearly highlighted.
Importantly, this would not be a chat bot.
It would not provide advice or
conclusions.
Its role would be purely navigational,
helping users find the right parts of the legislation quickly and
accurately for whatever scenario they have just described.
Because I think even with the clearer rules, translating the
legislation into real-world scenarios, especially for
businesses with variable rosters or non-standard work patterns,
will remain challenging.
However, where this would become extremely powerful is in the
data it generates.
Every query could be logged, anonymized, and aggregated
to build a real-time picture of where the legislation is causing
confusion,
where edge cases are emerging, and where further
clarification may be needed.
Instead of waiting years for compliance failures or
remediation claims to reveal these issues, this
creates a continuous feedback loop, allowing the legislation to
evolve over time, and ambiguity to be
progressively reduced.
My second proposal is a government-published conformance test suite for
payroll and workforce management software.
And this is where I feel most strongly about, because it addresses a
critical part of the problem that is being overlooked.
The majority of businesses in New Zealand do not manage leave manually.
They rely on software to do it for them.
And when a business adopts one of those systems, they reasonably assume
that it is compliant in New Zealand law.
But in practice, that assumption is not always correct.
Many of the systems used in New Zealand are built for global markets,
where New Zealand is treated as an afterthought.
And as a result, compliance issues can be baked into the software itself,
meaning businesses can be doing the wrong thing without
realizing it,
simply because they trust the systems they're using.
So that is why I believe MBIE should
publish a comprehensive conformance test suite for
leave management softwares.
This would consist of a set of canonical test scenarios,
each with clearly defined inputs and exact expected
outputs.
These scenarios would go well beyond the simple examples and
instead cover a full range of real-world complexity.
Software providers would be able to run these scenarios against their
systems and verify that their calculations produce the correct
results. And if they cannot, their system would not be compliant.
Over time, I think that this could form the basis of a formal
certification process where software used in New Zealand must
pass the conformance suite in order to be marked as compliant.
Because if we can get this right, it has a powerful effect.
Because when the software is correct, the vast majority of New
Zealand businesses will be compliant as well.
It is critical that software providers are able to translate
this legislation into code correctly and that we are all
interpreting it the same way.
I think a comprehensive test suite covering real-world scenarios
is exactly what makes this consistency possible.
So New Zealand has an opportunity to do something
genuinely world-class here. Not just pass
clearer legislation, but build the infrastructure that
ensures the legislation actually works in practice,
consistently across every business that relies on software to
manage their people.And so I urge
this committee to think more broadly about how we can
ensure this legislation works in the real world
by investing in the systems and frameworks that make it easy to
understand,
consistently applied, and reliably built into the software
used by businesses every day.
Thank you, Guy. We have time for a couple of quick questions.
We have a question from Vanessa Wienek.
Thank you, Guy. The AI
sort of almost sounds like an AI agent that you described for
looking up legislation and describing how it would
fit in with certain scenarios. Are you suggesting that that should be
provided centrally rather than somebody creating their own agent
to interrogate the legislation?
I think that should be a part of the website where everyone can
publicly go view the bill so that people who, or
business owners who are not relying on software would be able to go in and
describe their situation, and find the
correct relevant information on the bill automatically.
But I think the real powerful thing about that is what I described
as you get those queries, you get to understand where people are
becoming confused, and that really helps in the future
amendments to this bill.
So what you mean is that it should be paid for
publicly rather than somebody having their own AI license and
agent that they build themselves.
Yes.
Okay.
Question from Tiano Tuiono.
Thank you very much for your presentation.
Earlier you were saying that
these global software companies sometimes
are not aware or have not developed their software with
the very specific conditions that we have here in New Zealand, and that can cause
issues. Do you have some specific examples of those
issues?
Yep. I don't want to name names because
obviously it's a bad look for businesses.
But many of our clients
come off global systems onto our system and are
surprised when we have different rules about
how otherwise working days are currently defined and the difference
between
their old system to the way that our system works, which
is compliant with New Zealand law, the old bill.
And so because I see that difference all the time,
I know that a lot of global competitors
are not compliant.
Okay.
Thank you. We actually do have time for a very quick question from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you. And I just really want to make certain
that I've had experience in the past, having lived through
a Novo Pay, and that still creates issues for me.
Are you saying that
these-
Flashbacks
... flashbacks.
We were waiting to give it a flashback.
Waiting to give it a flashback.
So are you saying with the consideration given now, if we
consider this now, that we could alleviate any
possibility of something like that happening in the future?
Are you talking about the conformance test suite?
Yeah.
Yeah. So I think it would become-- well, I think this
24-month period or timeframe, if you could
build out a suite that would allow us to essentially
make sure and test that every scenario is covered and the
software is working correctly,
it will make a large majority of the businesses in New Zealand compliant
automatically because they're using software, right?
And it will kind of wean out the
software systems that are not compliant in New Zealand.
And then you could essentially say to business owners, "Hey,
these are the compliant softwares.
If you're using these uncompliant softwares, just so you know,
you're being uncompliant."
Because I think the issue is that business owners are
assuming that their software is compliant with the New Zealand law when
in a lot of cases it is not.
Right. Thank you very much, Guy. Really appreciate your-
Thank you
... innovative and entrepreneurial thinking in this process.
It's really helpful for us.
Brilliant. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll move on now to VUSA.
We have Aiden and Lewis in the room. Welcome. Come up to the table.
We've got 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions.
And we'll hand it over to you now.
Sitting here, me.
Thank you very much. „Tena koutou katoa」 to the chair and members of
this committee. And we thank the Select Committee for allowing us
the opportunity to present on the Employment Labor Bill.
We are representing Te Akau Toi, the Victoria University of Wellington Students
Association. As VUSA, we represent all toi from our university.
So we're making this submission on behalf of over 20,000 students, the
vast majority of which are part-time workers and will be affected by the
proposed bill. My name is Lewis Collins.
I'm the campaigns officer for VUSA, and I'm also joined here by Aiden
Donahue, the president of VUSA.
So VUSA opposes this bill in its current form fundamentally
because it shifts the risk from employers onto workers,
particularly with those with insecure and low-hour jobs.
Student workers will feel these changes sharply and
early. We know that students are already dealing with high
rent, food costs, transport costs, and a difficult labor
market. More often than not, our student food bank is
empty by the end of the week.So many of our tauira
rely on part-time and casual work simply to stay enrolled and keep
going. When leave protections are weakened, the impact is
immediate. There is less income security, less ability to
recover when sick, and more pressure to choose work over well-being.
We understand the need for clarity and reform in this space, but we do not
believe that this should come with a deduction in leave
entitlements. So our main concerns, student
workers who take more time off due to illness and burnout will lose
income.
Between us alone, we have a combined experience of nearly a decade in
hospitality. Many of our colleagues who were students already worked when they were
sick because hours were hard to come by.
We are only two examples, but we echo the wider experience of our
students.
This bill will create an incentive for students to keep working and not take their
required sick leave. The COVID pandemic showed us the importance of
staying home and recovering, but staying home will become more and
more irrational for students.
This will also have consequences for businesses, particularly small
businesses, that already face staffing pressures and limited
capacity to absorb absences. When workers are
unable to take proper leave or feel pressured to work while unwell, illness can
spread through workplaces and deepen existing shortages.
One of our students has told us they're already stretched by university demands
alongside paid work, and they're regularly called in to cover extra
shifts and have been left managing an entire reception area alone
because the rest of the team was sick.
So situations like this are not sustainable for workers or employers.
This is just one example of many.
So burnout, higher staff turnover, reduced service quality, and
greater training costs for businesses already operating on tight margins
won't be good for anyone, and this is not sustainable.
Another point is that our students are leaving the country in record numbers.
Many of our graduates are leaving New Zealand because good working opportunities
simply do not exist. Students will compare New Zealand wages
and conditions with countries like Australia and the United Kingdom.
So weaker early career conditions will accelerate this graduate flow.
According to Treasury secretary Ian Rennie, he stated that an estimated
20% to 40% of New Zealand graduates were migrating overseas.
So a significant share of our qualified young people are leaving during their
prime working and earning years, taking their skills, tax
contributions, innovation, and future leadership offshore.
And the long-term consequences of this will include a reduced skilled
workforce, weaker productivity growth, and greater pressure on key
sectors already facing shortages.
And this will mean fewer graduates investing in the future of Aotearoa New Zealand.
So we can see the value in being able to go home early and take specific hours of
sick leave to cover the remainder of a shift.
However, we strongly recommend parity of leave entitlements with full-time work and
for alternative holidays to be accrued on a full day basis.
We also want to emphasize the need of a strong definition of standard hours in the
bill. We're deeply concerned that this can take the form on following
agreed minimum hours rather than the usual or average hours worked in a
week, minimizing leave entitlements for workers with flexible
rostering.
And finally, we want to see protection against breaches to the spirit of the law,
especially the proposed changes to entitlements to holiday pay.
The requirement that 50% or more of the same day of the week as
the public holiday had been worked in the preceding 13 weeks.
This threshold is far too easy to circumvent, and workplaces that have flexible
hours or days of work, such as in retail or hospitality.
Again, we understand the need for clarity for employers.
However, this threshold will have the effect of incentivizing unneeded
roster rotation to avoid the increased liability of holiday
entitlements.
The Employment Leave Bill will make it harder for workers to rest, recover, and
stay financially afloat. Students do not need more precarity
dressed up as efficiency.
And ultimately, this will impact our disadvantaged students the most,
our Māori students, our Pasifika students, and our disabled tauira.
Women make up the majority of our university, and they too will also be
impacted.
So we urge that either this bill does not go ahead or amendments are made
to this bill that target administrative simplicity, protect low-hour
workers, and preserve genuine access to leave.
"Ma ku te rourou, mau te rourou, ka ora ai te iwi."
With my food basket and your food basket, the people will thrive forever.
A fair labor market should allow students to work and study and not force
them to choose between the two.
Excellent submission.
Thank you very much. We have a question from Jan Tinetti first.
Thank you. Thank you, Lewis, and thanks, Aiden, for coming in.
Really good submission. Thank you, because we've heard from other
sectors we have... And I want to ask a question about the standard hours, and we've
heard from other sectors where that's an impact on
them. Can you talk through what the majority
of students' work would look like in a week?
Is it that they have a small number of hours and then flexible
hours on top of that? You talked about one person.
Mm.
But what does that look like for the majority, would you think?
The majority of students, what we see is they'll have an agreed set of minimum
hours that they will be guaranteed to receive in a week.
So we're looking at fast food places, say McDonald's as the usual current
contract format. However, what that really means in practice is, say, you might
have six hours agreed minimum, but throughout the majority of your time, you'd be
working up to 10 to 20, just wherever you're rostered.
We're concerned, as we mentioned, that if we just go by the agreed minimum
hours, that that's considered your standard hours.
We just want to make sure that it reflects fairly what you actually are doing per
week.
So this could have, as it's written at the moment, this could have a huge impact
On
annual leave entitlements for students-
Well, if it's only-
... in those situations.
Exactly. If it's only based on what your agreed minimum hours is, if you're only
getting accrual leave from your minimum, but you are actually working
so much more than that, it'd be unfair, and you'd be losing out on a fair bit of
leave.
Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
And a question from Teanau Tuiono.
Oh, thank you very much, and thank you for your very strong submission.
And I agree with what you're saying as well.
Just to follow up around your comments that you made around
clarity and simplicity, we did have a couple of software people show up
as well. And I was wondering,
around that
clarity and simplicity part,
what would your suggestion be to this committee to ensure
that we do get that
clarity, but we still are able to
retain the leave entitlements that you've been talking about?
Well, it comes to the idea of, I guess, universalism, where if the leave
entitlements are the same across the board, that's less of an explanation between
that you have to make to either young workers or new workers and employers as to
what each different
type of agreement is worth. Ultimately,
personally, we do a lot of work with our students to
identify what entitlements they have already.
By putting in different entitlements depending on your work leave, that only opens
up the risk of a misunderstanding or abuse from
employers relying on not knowing what your entitlements are.
Wonderful. Thank you very much. Really appreciate you being here to be part of this
process with us. As I've said to those that have come and joined us in the room,
it's nice and refreshing to not be looking at the screen.
Mm-hmm.
So thank you for coming on down.
And we'll move on very soon.
Thank you very much.
Yeah. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you very much for your time.
With that said, we move on now to the Midwifery Employee Representation and
Advisory Services, who are online. We have David Munro.
Welcome, David. Thank you for joining us.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning. That includes time for questions.
We'll hand it over to you now.
Kia ora. Yeah. Thank you to the committee for the opportunity to
submit.
You've got our written submission.
I realized in preparing for this, I think I'll probably start at the bottom and go
back to the top, where I note at the end that
the small number of things about this bill that we support could easily be enacted
as part of an amendment to the Holidays Act.
And having listened to a lot of the submissions today, I think that could be a much
simpler way to have tackled what have been identified as the problems.
We do, however, start with a congratulation.
I haven't actually heard it mentioned today, but the attending to
the unintended consequence in the current legislation
whereby
women, in particular, come back from parental leave to
a leave that they may be able to take but which has no value,
is a long overdue improvement, and it
should've been done as an amendment to the Holidays Act.
I should mention that MERAS is the midwives union.
99% of our members are women. Many of them are mothers.
And
it's a standard piece of advice that we, under the current legislation,
give to people is, "Use up your annual leave before you go on parental leave,
because it may not have any value to you when you come back," which is
completely counterintuitive to the fact that when you come back from parental
leave, you may indeed then want
to have some paid leave for rest and recreation, which
has been pointed out
in a number of the submissions, but also just to attend to all the
new burdens of parenthood.
So a piece of good news there.
Mm-hmm.
Most of our members work 0.6 or 0.8,
and it varies. So
we may not be having to give advice about taking your annual leave.
I can see that the transition period, which later on we've suggested should
be three years. I'm interested that the education sector
gets 10. Health is pretty complicated, too.
And
how that all shakes down would be something that would
take time.
Other submitters have talked about promoting the casualization.
Frankly, permanent part-time work is a real
feature of a lot of work in the health sector.
And the fact that those rosters move around, I've been interested in the
comments about the additional hours that would create the leave
compensation payment versus the permanent ones.
The incentives are difficult to completely assess at this stage,
because we know from a number of our members that
some of them want more permanent shifts and currently do casual shifts,
and there would be a drive to get that so that you're accumulating
leave on those. For others, the preference is
to be genuinely casual. You ring up, "No, don't have to
come."
And the leave compensation payment
would be an improvement on the current
8%.
Otherwise, the working day, and I've
been working with the Holidays Act for many years, including for unions and as
a consultant, and
trying to work that out has already been the subject of a huge amount of work.
Bournemouth Kai was referring to it as well.
I think the 7 out of 13 is too
onerousIn the health sector, there are a number
of formulas written into collective agreements.
5 out of 13 is not uncommon.
When I worked as a consultant in the
fast food industry, we had a collective agreement where 2 out of
wound up being the proportion that was
deemed to be fair. So we proposed that it
should be 4 out of 13 in the previous 13
weeks.
And the other thing about that too is
are perverse incentives, because
people will think, "I need to get up to the five in the 13 weeks."
And you don't really want people making decisions about taking an extra
shift when it may not be in their interests or the interests of the employer
simply to meet a threshold which is more onerous than the one
that just generally applies in health at the moment.
We've made comments
about the transition arrangements.
Bereavement leave, it's not an opportunity
to actually
target some of the things that are insufficient of leave in the current act.
In collective agreements and in the health sector in particular,
the
leave available when the circle of life goes wrong, when it can be a partner or
a child who dies,
is often more than the three days, and it would be a
strange situation where that happens to somebody, and they only take three days.
And in terms of the other submitters, I've always been a hawk about the fact that
I detest the practice of employers who just automatically say, "Oh,
do you want to take some annual leave?" And you've run out of sick leave.
"Do you want to take some annual leave?" Because I very much support the views that
annual leave is for rest and recreation.
And if you're on bereavement leave, it's not rest and recreation.
If you're on sick leave, it's not rest and recreation.
And that's a very strong argument, I think, for improved bereavement leave.
We've got collective agreements that includes
pet parents.
We've suggested here spouse/partner,
because as I say, there's an extra layer of
trauma and tragedy in that situation because we can all expect to go to our
grandparents' funerals. We don't expect to go to our children's funerals.
We didn't comment about the
sick leave accumulation and the impact that will have
on a lot of our members. And we would further submit
about an underpinning mechanism.
I heard earlier the theoretical example of the person who can take 10 Mondays
off.
And frankly, that irks
union members as well. You're a full-time worker, you can only take two weeks
off with your 10-day sick leave. You've got a colleague who's chosen to only work
one day, they get 10. But having mentioned that we are
predominantly .6.8 membership, that
some sort of underpinning in there of at least
24 hours applying regardless of how
few the hours might be should be something to consider.
But
that's probably all I want to say, that the bulk was in the submission, and we
support the CTU submission in terms of the problems, and I've made a comment there.
There is a lot of drafting work that needs to be done.
There are parts that you read, and you sort of struggle
to identify the meaning. But I presume
in all good pieces of legislation, we're at the beginning of the process, and the
improvements will flow.
But the final point I think is that it'd be a hell of a lot easier to just
do the necessary amendments to the current legislation.
Thank you very much, David. We do appreciate your participation in the process and
your submission that you've given us today.
Thank you.
Thanks. Any-
Oh, sorry. Did you have a question, Teanau?
Was there time for questions here? Yeah.
Yeah, there is always time for questions. There's not always questions.
But-
Yeah
... Teanau, we do have a question from Teanau Tuivai.
Yeah. Thank you very much for your comprehensive submission.
We heard earlier from the software people that said that they could
sort this all out in two years.
But you're suggesting three years.
Could you explain to the committee why you think we should have that
extra year in terms of potential transitional arrangements?
Yeah. It's partly in the health sector, and I don't know if this has
been mentioned before, and it is
another interesting consideration about the holidays legislation,
because although it's there for rest and recreation,
it's not necessarily always easy to take, and there are huge leave
balances. I
caught the tail end of Steve Haring's submission earlier.
I know that amongst some of the senior members in the health sector, you can have
leave balances that wind up at half a year.
And
they don't get taken for rest and recreation.
They wind up being paid out when people change jobs
or retire.
So it's partly those huge leave balances being there, and
it's the technicalities of the software companies I don't think are as
important as the relationships. It's a major change to the way
the legislation will work, and that changes the relationships between
employers and employees, and there's going to be quite a period of
time to settle in. As I say, that pattern between
works hours that attract leave compensation payment versus hours that are
attracting leave,
and the way people want to sort that out, the impact that has on rosters,
it's not just about the leave that you accumulate or the pay, but how you organize
work in the workplace. And our assessment is that there's going to
be quite a period of shakedown needed.
Thank you, David.
Thank you very much, David.
Committee, just before we move on, we have a member,
Phil Twyford, that wants to acknowledge some guests before they leave.
Thanks, Chair. So colleagues, this is a delegation with us who
are from
Cambodia and Laos, and they are in New Zealand as part of
the Young Leaders program. It's like a fellowship program for six
months-
Okay
... funded through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
We're waving, but should we be clapping?
Hmm?
Thank you very much for observing our submitting-
Exciting, exciting
... submission.
It's invigorating.
They all want to be MPs now.
Right.
We will move on now to the Young Workers Resource Center,
who we have online, Matariki Roche.
Welcome, Matariki. Thank you so much for being with us today.
We've got 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions, and we'll hand
over to you now.
I'm Matariki Roche .
I'm
the comms and engagement coordinator at Young Workers Resource Center.
We also hosted the wonderful delegation of young leaders from
Cambodia and Laos, so big shout-out to them as well for coming along today.
Firstly, I just wanted to thank you all for your time, and I'm going to take our
submission as
read.
I've got a couple of other points that I wanted to make just to build off our
written submission.
Firstly, I just wanted to paint a picture for you actually about the reality of
being a young worker at the moment.
Young workers are more likely to be in part-time, casual, or irregular
work.
We're more likely to be working additional hours.
Often we feel that we cannot refuse those additional hours for fear
of missing out on future shifts, or for the need to
catch up to our more experienced coworkers.
We have a vulnerability to getting sick.
There are often environmental factors,
like s****y, damp, crowded housing,
that means that we're more vulnerable to getting sick.
We have less negotiating power when it comes to negotiating
our individual employment agreements.
We're more likely to be in low-paid work.
We face the financial insecurity and the instability of
things like youth rates, training wage, and 90-day trials.
And along with that, we're in a time of our lives where
the impact and the financial burden of unexpected
circumstances hit us harder, and it's harder to absorb that.
So, with that in mind,
we deeply, deeply oppose the changes to the Holidays
Act through this proposed Employment Leave Bill.
We believe that the proposed bill will
exacerbate those inequalities that young workers already face that I just
mentioned.
And we know that young workers will be missing out on leave, particularly
sick and annual leave, through those additional hours that they work.
We also know that they're going to have a harder time negotiating
more than the bare minimum because of these changes.
Moving from a days or a weeks system to an
hourly accrual
makes it really hard as a young worker to negotiate that.
It's much easier to just say, "Hey, can I have one
more day of sick leave added to my contract?" Rather than being like, "Hey, can we
change the negotiation from 0.385 to
whatever it might be?"
So we also know that
not only are the minimums going to be reduced, but also the possibility of
getting more will also be reduced.
We mentioned in our written submission that young workers are often
misclassified as casual workers when the reality is that
they are part-timers. And we're also really concerned
about the pathway forward for those
misclassified workers because of this
bill.
We often tell workers, the young workers that come to us, about the benefits
of arguing
for a permanent contract, even if they're on low hours.
And they have to balance the benefits of that with the immense amount
of fear and the very real possibility that they might lose their job or not
be offered future shifts if they raise that issue.
And now with the leave compensation payment, what we will see is that
those extra hours that
we often say to employers, "Hey,
just put them on a five hour a week contract," even if they're more likely to be
doing 10 or 15. If you put them on a permanent contract, you can make those hours
lower. And in the current system, their annual and
sick leave will still accrue on that.
However, in the proposed system, that will no longer happen, and so
those benefits of going for that more permanent and secure working
agreement is also lowered because of this.
We also just frankly believe that
no leave entitlements should be reduced because of
any proposed bill.
We should be improving things as we go along, making our working lives
better for the generations coming up beneath us.
But this bill does not do that, and
we will see that, in fact, leave and general rights of workers,
particularly young workers, will be eroded because of
this.Young workers also have not been in the
position to be able to contribute or have a say in or
shape the employment system that we currently exist in.
We face all of these inequalities that makes it harder for us
to have thriving lives that include work,
but we have not been able to have the
contribution to shape the system that we're in, whether that's because of
the fact that the system changed so drastically before we were born or
even just thinking about the workers that have come into the workforce since the
last election.
But in saying that,
that means that you, the committee, actually have the real opportunity to think of
young workers and keep us in mind
when shaping what our employment system looks like.
Just because we haven't had a say doesn't mean that we don't have the option to
create something new.
And lastly, with that, I would just like to request that the
committee supports the pledge proposed by PSA
that no
entitlements or leave balances are reduced as a result of this bill.
We also support the recommendations and the submission made by the CTU as well
as PSA Youth. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We have our first question from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thank you for your submission.
I'm always a bit skeptical when submitters submit
on a bill and are essentially of the view that it should entirely be got rid
of. So I just want to understand from you if
you understand that your young workers
also include pregnant young women?
Yeah. And if you read our submission, you would see the points that we supported of
this bill.
Right. So I'm just making sure in your verbal submission, you're
reflecting that you're not entirely against this bill, and this
bill does improve the outcomes for
some workers,
not blatant get rid of the whole thing.
Like clean-
Again, if you read our submission, you would have seen the points that we did
support, such as payslips being mandatory,
leave being available from day one.
Yeah.
However,
as we said in our submission, we hold the position that
improving
some parts of our employment system should not come at the cost of
reducing leave or reducing those rights for other workers.
It doesn't have to be this give some, take some.
We should be increasing the benefit for all.
No, I appreciate that. I'm just making sure it comes through on the corridor live
as well. And the third part of that is, doesn't this actually mean
for young casual workers,
that they will receive
their allowance at the
12.5%, essentially meaning they would be
better off than if they just got sick leave when
they actually needed it during their casual
work?
Yes and no.
The majority of the young workers on casual agreements that we come through, one,
have been in the casual role with regular hours for more than six months.
So they do have entitlement to sick leave.
And while we definitely
support the recognition of the precarity of casual work that the
LCP reflects,
we also know that it does put
those who are misclassified, particularly misclassified, but actually all casual
workers, in a precarious issue where
if you don't have...
That money that you receive from that LCP in your last
pay cycle doesn't actually mean a whole heap when you are sick
in the current week and you need to take leave, but you then don't have sick
leave to take and can't pay your bills that
week. So while there is some benefit
for that, there is still a cost, and
we are still going to see workers either taking unpaid sick leave
or, more likely I assume, coming to work sick and
spreading their illness around.
So just to be clear, rather than trusting that people can
manage their own money, and end up
with more in the pocket because they receive this entitlement
regardless of whether they take sick leave at all during the period, your
view is let's not give that to everyone,
and let's have a system that says only those that
use their sick leave are the ones that get it.
I'm not sure if that's exactly what I'm saying.
I do think there should be some recognition for the precarious nature of
casual work, but I also think all workers should have the protection of sick
leave.
It's a protection that benefits us all, and it's a safety
net that catches us,
which is particularly important when young workers are in precarious and vulnerable
situations that already have a leaking safety net.
Thank you. And a question from Teanaru Tuiono.
Kia ora. Tēnā koe Matariki. Me mana kia kaua tō rōpū e
pikahia ēna mahi. My
questions around,
you gave an example where
workers will end up having to calculate actually what their leave entitlement
will.
And
for me, that sounded like that would provide less clarity.
And so I wanted to just check in with you to make sure that was the point that you
were making, because the point of this whole exercise is to make things clearer,
and that will make it less clearer for workers.
And then I've got a follow-up question from that.
Yeah. Kia ora. And tēnā koe hoki.
Yeah, 100% there. Essentially, it's going to make things less clear
for workers. I've also had conversations where we're
supported by solidarity members here at YWCA, and a few of those are employers.
A couple of them have reached out to me because they've said, "Oh, we've
heard about how this is going to impact young workers, and we want to give our
workers, our employees more than the minimum.
Can we just give them extra five, 10 days," yada, yada, yada,
"or maintain the 10 days?" AndI was like,
"Yeah, except you're still going to have to do that conversion." And that was
really unclear to them,
and these employers, as well as these young workers.
There was a lot of
confusion, harder to find a pathway forward. It's less clear, in short.
And my follow-up question is the comment she made around
how
people are out there, they're told their casual workers are actually their
part-time workers. I wonder if you could give some concrete, specific
examples that would make it clearer for the committee.
Kia ora. Yeah, for sure.
So
we had an ice cream worker in one of our workshops a
couple of weeks ago, and this young worker had been working at this
ice cream shop for, I think it was nearly two and a half
years. They worked consistently every Saturday,
and
those hours would increase during the summer times, as you can imagine.
But they'd been working regularly, at least every Saturday, for over two
years. They were on a casual agreement.
When we described the working patterns, in our workshops, we go through and we talk
about employment types, and when we explain what a
part-time permanent employee looks like in comparison to a casual worker, this
young worker had this penny drop moment of, "Oh,
shoot, I'm supposed to be a part-time worker."
They were really scared when they learnt that, actually, the reality
of that means that their boss can just stop offering them shifts, and that
stability that they've gained over the past two years, that reliance on this income
would just instantly drop.
Sorry-
When-
Matariki, I must stop you there because we've got to move on to our next
submitter. We've gone over time with you, but really appreciate your contribution
to the process, and you making yourself available for us today, so
thank you.
Kia ora.
Thanks. Kia ora rā.
We move on now to Business South, who we have online.
We have Shona Brown, Katerina Slade, and Wilfred
Prell.
Good afternoon, members of the committee and Chair.
I'm Shona Brown, advocacy advisor at Business South,
and we are part of the Otago Chamber of Commerce
and
the shareholder of Business New Zealand.
We're presenting around 1,400 businesses across Otago and
Southland.
The Holidays Act has been a genuine pain point for our members for years,
with
examples like payroll errors, costly remediation,
and real uncertainty about whether they're getting it right.
So we would like this reform to succeed and support
the direction of the bill.
I'm sitting here not as a technical expert.
Our role is to bring the lived experience of businesses on the
ground, and our submission is built directly from member
consultation.
We were fortunate to have Minister Van Velden join a members-only
webinar only recently to walk through the bill and take
questions, which has directly shaped what we've raised in our
submission. So rather than speak to the content in our submission,
I've brought along a member. I've got Katerina Slade
and Wilfred Prell from PurePak.
They're based in Cromwell in Central Otago.
They're exactly the kind of business this bill needs to work for.
They have a seasonal workforce with variable hours and
weather-dependent operations.
They can speak to both what's working in the bill and where the practical problems
sit, and possible solutions. I'd encourage the committee to
direct any detailed questions to both of them, as they're
far better placed than I am to bring those issues to life.
So thank you to the committee for your time, and I'll hand over to Katerina.
Thank you, Shona.
I'd like to introduce ourselves a little bit further.
We're a cherry-growing and pack house business in Cromwell.
Our harvest season runs specifically from around...
Well, not quite specifically, from the middle of December, and that
can shift around within a two-week period due to the high uncertainty of it.
The harvest period runs for about six weeks, sometimes seven.
We, at peak, employ 250 to
300 people to work both on the picking and harvest side, and in our
packing operation.
Many of our employees are backpackers on working holiday
visas. We've also got a reasonably good cohort of
returning semi-retired employees and a
few local school kids.
We support the bill's direction
overall, and there are a lot of great components to it that we
definitely agree with.
Our verbal submission will pull out the parts that are
concerning to us or that we think could be tweaked to work more
appropriately for seasonal employment.
The
first
kind of area of concern, I guess, is around the LCP and sick leave.
Obviously, if you reverse engineer it, it's based on a 10-day entitlement or the
equivalent thereof.
Firstly, that increases the cost to employers to the full 10-day
entitlement, which is more than what most permanent
employees would
cost, because many of them don't actually take their full entitlement.
It's there if they need it, and so it should be,
but it makes it
slightly weighted towards a casual.Secondly, and
probably most importantly, as a food handling organization where we are
processing cherries and there are 70 people kind of
coming into contact with the food.
Granted, there is a lot of PPE involved.
We strongly prefer that sick leave is
actually used for genuine illness to prevent people coming to
work when they're sick and coming into contact with cherries that are then going
out into the world for consumption.
So
paying out in cash that sick leave removes the incentive for an
employee to call in sick on the day when they're genuinely sick.
They may feel able to do work, but we still don't want them contaminating the
product.
So that's why we're against cashing out any kind of sick leave and would prefer
it's used.
Bereavement leave is another one that we're a little bit
worried about the potential for misuse. So...
Oh, actually, sorry, I've skipped ahead.
Yes. We'll talk about the uncertainty factor in the LCP.
So there's a bit of rounding or uncertainty factor woven into that, which
we'd just like to
raise that as an employer, we equally experience that uncertainty
factor. We can offer someone, when they're on a truly casual
contract, we offer them a shift, and they don't have to accept it.
So that uncertainty is experienced both by the employee because they don't know if
they're going to get offered a shift, and by the employer who doesn't know if the
employee is going to accept the shift, and we have to build that variability into
our business as well. So we don't support there being extra compensation
for that.
Bereavement leave,
particularly in a short employment period, there
is not that built-up trust as there is with a longer-term employment arrangement,
and it is open to misuse if
an employee, two days into their contract, there just needs to be some
kind of
ability to make a reasonable request to check the evidence so that the integrity of
the leave's purpose is protected.
The,
I guess, largest concern for us is the
assessment of an otherwise working day, and we really appreciate
the attempt to increase the
clarity around that. That is definitely needed.
The current
legislation and interpretation is a real significant source of
friction in our
workplace and I think in a lot of seasonal businesses.
So definitely can acknowledge and agree that clarity is needed.
Where the concern comes from is when we employ someone
in the middle of December, right when our harvest period starts for a six-week,
seven-week contract.
In that period, there's a disproportionate number of public
holidays
that fall.
And under the proposed assessment of looking at up to 13
weeks history,
but less if less exists,
you could end up in a situation where someone has only worked two days
in that period, and they decline every other shift that we offer them,
and they're entitled to then four days of
paid public holiday leave. So
yes, it would be very clear on what the entitlement is.
But in practicality, it's weighted too far.
Equally, on the other foot, the opposite could happen.
Someone could work every other day except that Friday and Saturday
beforehand and not be entitled to a single public holiday.
But they've actually worked more
than someone who might be. So
it's tricky. I can see it's really tricky.
A
potential suggestion which we've come up on how to
tackle this issue is in the situation where a worker has
a really short work history or less than 13
weeks,
is to assume that over a 12-month period, if they're doing casual work,
that they perhaps qualified for half of all the public holidays and
include that in the LCP and have no other
holiday entitlements.
That way, it's
clear what the entitlements are. You don't get it, you get an extra piece of
payment for the fact that
to compensate you for not being able to take the public holidays.
And it weights
it across the workforce at every time of the year.
It's not disproportionately hitting businesses that, like ours, which are
forced to harvest our crop during that summer period.
I believe that's...
Wilfred, did I miss anything?
Yeah, we just want the burden of cost to be fair,
more equally spread,
and to remove in that short term
where a really short work period exists,
to make it
more equitable
in a way that keeps the clarity that the bill aims for.
That's all I've got for you.
Great. Thank you so much. I just want to say I really appreciate the constructive
and helpful submission that you provided us, just the
detail and
live examples are really helpful for us to work through.
Thank you.
So thank you for that. And we'll
move on now to our final submitter for today,
which is Unite Union, Mana Topu, and that is Charlie
Williams with us online.
Okay.
Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for question, and we will leave it to
you now.
All right. Kia ora koutou. Ko Tali Williams toku ingoa.
I'm the Assistant National Secretary of Unite Union, based in Tāmaki
Makaurau.
Unite Union represents 5,500 members in fast food,
hospitality, entertainment, hotels, cinemas, and
the call center industries.
We are opposing the Employment Leave Bill that would slash the pay
and leave entitlements of tens of thousands of working people,
mainly lower paid working people who are already struggling through cost of living
and the fuel crisis.
Under this bill, the work completed outside of contracted hours would
no longer accrue sick leave or annual leave, a change that would
disproportionately affect part-time and casual workers.
These workers are our members in low-paid industries.
And further, these workers are already in precarious employment
situations. These changes will only make life worse for
them. We don't accept that the bill is about simplifying
complex law. The findings and recommendations of the Holidays
Act Taskforce, which was put in place
to address complexities and reduce complexities, has been largely
ignored.
The exploring of the hours-based accrual system was
discontinued by the taskforce partway through when
they realized it financially disadvantaged a substantial number
of workers compared to the current act.
That seems to be no concern to the current government.
As an example of affected industries, a substantive number of
workers in fast food have a set amount of guaranteed
hours, and then hours beyond that are considered
additional hours, as defined in the proposed bill.
So over a sample of a 13-week period in
2025, to give an example, a third
of hours worked over that period were not guaranteed under one
main fast food brand that we cover.
A worker within this fast food brand worked an average
of 36 hours a week. However, only five of
those hours were guaranteed, with the others being classed as
additional hours.
That means under the new bill, this worker would only accrue leave
based on her five guaranteed hours,
which would be 0.38 of an hour per week
accrued. This is unfair and untenable.
To get one week's leave, this worker
would have to work for two years.
This for a worker who averages 36 hours and contributes to our
economy, pays her taxes, and so on.
The proposed 12% in lieu of leave only confirms the lack of
understanding of the hand-to-mouth nature of those working in
precarious and low-paid employment.
One in such a position cannot afford to put money aside to
allow for leave to be taken at a later date.
People will invariably need and use the money now, particularly
in a cost of living crisis.
If you don't have the savings because you're trying to cover weekly
costs, you are punished again with not being able to
afford to take the leave.
Then, of course, there's the reduction to sick leave.
The same group of fast food workers that I referred to earlier, under
this bill, would accrue sick leave for only two-thirds of the work that they
do.
Of course, the major issue with less sick leave for these workers
is that they will come to work sick because they can't afford to
take unpaid leave.
This means passing on illness, resulting in more sickness, not
only on site with their fellow workers,
but the broader community, because these people work with food
and prepare and serve food.
As we all know and have experienced, people are getting sick longer
and more seriously these days with viruses such as COVID, RSV,
and so on.
We know that under this bill, employers, seeing what seems on the face of
it to be a financial advantage, will seek to offer the least amount of
guaranteed hours and then simply top up hours as they
wish.
This means the less they will have to afford for your annual and sick leave.
This risk of increased casualization will have a compounding
negative effect on the community.
Of course, the more precarious the work, the worse off the workers'
lives, but also the less resources people have to put back
into the economy.
Precarious work also results in more exploitation and risk
of exploitation as people clamber for the dregs of hours their
employer makes available, and those workers feel compromised
to raise various workplace concerns,
and even
a fear of raising serious health and safety risks.
These are people already struggling on low wages and low hours during
a cost of living crisis.
It is shameful that the government is not only refusing to help
those most in need, but is actively seeking to legislate to make life
tougher for them.
Working people deserve holidays and time with their families, and they
deserve to take the time off they need when they're sick and when their children
are sick.
Unite Union strongly opposes this attack on leave entitlements
of the most vulnerable workers. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Tali. We have our first question from Jan Tinetti.
Kia ora, Tali, and thank you very much for your submission this morning,
or this afternoon. And can I also say thank you for
your, uh
Example that you gave, your case study that you titled there
SS, I felt that was really, really helpful.
When I was going through and we were determining Labor's position on this
bill, our key
rationale was that nobody would be worse off at the end than at the
beginning, and obviously that's not the case.
And when I first started, I was told it's only a few workers,
but I'm getting the sense that we're talking about a lot of workers
here. You say you represent
5,500 workers. How many of them would be in this
situation, or roughly how many of them would be in this situation of having
guaranteed hours, but then having to work way more hours
on their roster?
I would say about half, conservatively.
Yeah. So it's quite a big amount that we're talking about.
And the question that I asked the Law Society before, is there a
fear that the way that this is written at the moment
incentivizes that to happen more?
Yes, absolutely. That is our fear.
Yeah. Okay, thank you. And question now from Teanau Tuiono.
Kia ora, Tally. Thank you very much for your very clear
submission, and with a lot of really useful detail
in there.
I wanted to come back to your point around the hours accrual system, and
you were referencing, I think, the task force in 2018.
I wasn't anywhere near Parliament then.
I wonder if you could
maybe tell us a bit more about the problems with that approach,
why it was abandoned, and what that impact of that will be on
your members.
Can I just, before you do that, Tally, just let you know you've got one minute left
in your submission. So if we could make that brief.
Okay. Well, in summary, I don't have a
whole lot to say on that other than my understanding is
that the findings of the task force were that the hours-based accrual system
wouldn't work, that it wasn't appropriate for all forms of work,
particularly those part-timers and casuals,
and therefore, that was abandoned.
I don't have any more to say on that.
Thank you. I really appreciate your participation in this process, and you making
the time to come and join us for our hearings today, Tally.
Thank you again.
Thank you, Tally.
And we'll now move into private session with our
officials. Thank you.